Title: What's in our Male Multivitamin and why

Our in-house nutrition team breaks down our Male Multivitamin, explaining what the formula contains and how the ingredients help us ‘live life in colour’.

Based on a continuing nationwide cross-sectional study of nutrient intakes, the National Diet and Nutrition Survey (NDNS) has identified the key areas and nutrient deficiencies that the UK population experiences. This survey groups individuals in age and biological sex.

The latest results from the rolling programme suggest that the UK population overall continues to consume too much sugar and saturated fat and not enough fruit and vegetables or fibre. 1, 2

When it comes to micronutrients (vitamins and minerals with significant biological functions), adults aged 19-64 lacked in the following key ones 3:

    Folate; 52% had blood folate concentrations below the threshold indicating possible deficiency
    Vitamin D; 18% of male adults had blood level concentrations below the threshold indicating increased risk of poor musculoskeletal health
    Selenium; 26% of male adults had intake lower than the Lower Reference Nutrient Intake (LRNI)

In our Male Multivitamin, we have included a comprehensive range of essential vitamins, minerals and extracts to fill potential gaps and cover the basics for all men. From immune health and energy support to cognitive function, hair loss, heart and muscle health and even fertility and reproduction, this potent formula has been designed by our in-house nutrition experts to help you feel 100% more often!

Here’s how…

Immune health

The immune system is a complex matrix of cells working together to keep us healthy by stopping toxic pathogens from entering our body and wreaking havoc. Over the last two years, our understanding of the importance of a healthy immune system has significantly increased with the COVID-19 pandemic. A healthy diet is key to a strong immune system. Eating a variety of fruits and vegetables which are high in fibre help to keep us feeling full for longer and also benefit our gut microbes. If you’re interested in reading more about our digestive system and its influence on our health and specifically immunity, please read it here. Fruits, nuts, seeds and vegetables are also full of micronutrients that we need to support our immune health.

With zinc, selenium and vitamin C, our Male Multi has been designed to support normal immune function and protection of cells from oxidative stress - disease and inflammation induce the oxidative damage to our cell membranes. 4 Compared to other multivitamins, we have used the highly absorbable forms of zinc and selenium; citrate and selenomethionine respectively. For vitamin C, we have used the form of ascorbic acid - the form found naturally in fruit and vegetables. Our Male Multi also contains 25mcg of vitamin D, another key nutrient for the maintenance of normal immune health, in its active, highly bioavailable form of D3 sourced from cholecalciferol from algae. 5 Public health England (PHE) strongly recommends that everyone above the age of 5 years old should be supplementing with vitamin D from October through to March. Although the sun may be shining now, keeping your levels topped up throughout the summer is key.

Energy and Mental Support

Our Male Multivitamin supports all aspects of an active lifestyle; with vitamin B12 and folate which contribute to the reduction of tiredness, fatigue and normal psychological function, thiamine and riboflavin which contribute to normal energy release from food, niacin for the normal functioning of the nervous system, pantothenic acid for normal mental performance, and vitamin B6 to support normal hormonal regulation (to name just some!). 6 Due to the water soluble nature of these vitamins - they dissolve in water so they can be easily eliminated with urine -, we made sure to include high doses of the most bioavailable forms of these nutrients, such as methyltetrahydrofolate for folate and methylcobalamin for vitamin B12.

Brain function

The brain is a fascinating organ, often dubbed the 'control centre' for our bodies. In order to achieve optimal brain health, it needs to be fed properly with macronutrients (yes that’s carbohydrates & fats) as well as certain smaller nutrients which have a wealth of evidence-based research behind them. Pantothenic acid (ring a bell?) contributes to normal mental performance, while iodine supports normal cognitive and nervous system function. These two, along with the antioxidant functions of zinc, manganese, selenium, copper, vitamin C and E, which help protect your cells (including your brain cells!) from oxidative stress, all play a key role in maintaining normal cognitive and brain health. 7

Healthy hair

Ok, we have all either been there or are heading in that direction; as we age our hair health suffers a little, either by falling out completely or by thinning and greying. Whilst genetics, age and our environment (think pollution) have an influence on the health and appearance of our hair, our diet is a big factor. Hair is mostly made up of protein so make sure you are eating enough protein (at least 0.8g/kg of body weight). But what other nutrients can help here? B vitamins - especially biotin - have been long researched for their benefits on hair health as they help provide our body with the energy required for the stimulation of hair follicles. 8 Deficiencies in biotin, folate, riboflavin and vitamin B12 have been linked to hair loss. In this potent formula, we've made sure to include high levels of biotin (200% of the Nutrient Reference Value), as well as copper, a nutrient with potent antioxidant function, involved in normal hair pigmentation.

Bone, Joint and Muscle health

Vitamin D contributes to the maintenance of normal muscle function, as well as normal absorption and utilisation of calcium and phosphorus for the maintenance of healthy bones. Manganese and copper, two minerals with antioxidant properties, contribute to the maintenance of normal connective tissues - found in our joints, and Vitamin C contributes to the normal formation of collagen, and may exhibit beneficial effects on bone and joint health. That said, our Male Multi can be taken both by those with an active lifestyle and those above the age of 50 who want to ensure they give their musculoskeletal system some extra care!

Heart health

Our Male Multi contains high doses of thiamine, one of the B vitamins involved in the normal functioning of the heart. We have also included lycopene, a bright red carotenoid found in tomatoes and other red fruits and vegetables, which has been long researched for its potential benefits on heart health and blood pressure. 9 The lycopene in this formula is naturally sourced from tomato extract.

Fertility & Reproduction

Trying to conceive with your partner? Our formulation can certainly help you out. It contains high amounts - 15mg (150% NRV)- of zinc, a nutrient involved in normal fertility and reproduction, and in normal testosterone levels in the blood, plus selenium which contributes to normal sperm production. This potent formula also contains antioxidants vitamin C and E which contribute to the protection of sperm cells (spermatozoa) from oxidative stress - oxidative damage of sperm cells by free radicals has been associated with reduced sperm motility. Lastly, we've included Vitamin B12, which has demonstrated beneficial effects on sperm quality by enhancing sperm motility and reducing sperm DNA damage. 10

Blood glucose control

Chromium is an essential trace mineral that appears to enhance the action of insulin, a hormone critical to the metabolism and storage of carbohydrate, fat, and protein in the body. Our body needs small amounts of this mineral - it’s called the ‘trace’ element. This is why we have included 20mcg of chromium in our Male Multi, in its highly absorbable form picolinate, to cover 50% of the Nutrient Reference Value (NRV). 11

Prostate health

Antioxidants, like vitamin C, vitamin E and carotenoids, are molecules that fight free radicals in our body. Free radicals can ‘wear and tear’ our cells, a process known as oxidative stress. This process can also be seen as "biological rust", which can damage DNA, proteins and other cell structures, triggering many diseases, including many types of cancer. Antioxidants neutralise these free radicals, reducing their capacity to cause damage. Lycopene has been identified as a carotenoid with potent antioxidant function and there is evidence suggesting a protective effect of high intakes of lycopene against prostate cancer. 12 However, the mechanisms in which lycopene may reduce the risk of prostate cancer remain unclear, and further studies are needed to determine them.

There’s more?

Our Male Multi is free from bulking agents, fillers, artificial flavourings and colourings, to make sure you get all the goodness without any nasties! Our in-house nutritionists have also made sure to use the most bioavailable - easily absorbed - form of the nutrients included in a carefully selected dose.

Order yours now!